Brief Biography of Gyurme Jamyang Tenpel

From Supplementary Biographies for the Lineage of The Ḍākinī’s Whispered Transmission of Secret
Conduct

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Gyurme Jamyang Tenpel was born in Tramkhok Khartama in Washul. He entered the door of Dharma
in the Sakya tradition, and studied with Ngor Khenchen Palden Lodrö Gyaltsen,[1] Jamyang
Rinchen Dorje,[2] Wara Shabdrung Rinpoche Jamyang Namkha Gyaltsen.[3] On the Nyingma side,
he received ripening empowerments, liberating instructions and experiential guidance in the
Great Perfection from Dzaka Choktrul Rinpoche Kunzang Namgyal[4] and Nyoshul Lungtok Tenpai
Nyima.[5] He remained at the lotus feet of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, in particular, for
a long time. He also received boundless ripening and liberating instructions of the Sarma
and Nyingma traditions from the Lord of Secrets Jamyang Loter Wangpo,[6] Ngari Chöje Kunga
Jamyang,[7] and the Minyak scholar Norbu Tendzin.[8]

It was from Lord Loter Wangpo that he received the Whispered Transmission of Thangtong Gyalpo.[9]
He completed the approach and accomplishment practices of many yidam deities, including
Hevajra, the outer, inner and secret forms of Pañjaranātha, Sarvavid Vairocana 'Subduer
of the Elemental Spirits’, and White and Green Tārā. He recited the 'Three-Oṃ' Yoginī mantra
a million times, the ten-syllable Tārā mantra a hundred million times, a hundred million
Maṇi mantras, a hundred million Amitābha mantras, four million Tārā,[10] and a hundred
million seven-syllable Mahākāla mantras. He stayed at the great site of Pema Shelpuk ('Lotus
Crystal Cave') and later in life at Tsa Chujuk, a practice place of the Great Compassionate
One, and site of a hundred thousand maṇi stones first established by Khye’u Rigdzin
Chenpo. On a hillside, where he had had a vision of Eleven-Faced Avalokiteśvara, he established
a new temple dedicated to the deity, in which he spent the rest of his life. He practised
the Profound Whispered Transmission of Thangtong Gyalpo on Demon-Severing.[11] Venerable
Tārā and Pañjaranātha Mahākāla appeared to him in visions. Precious 'relics' (ringsel)
arose from the point between the eyes on the mural of Eleven-Faced Avalokiteśvara in the
temple. Devotees offered scarves, and in spite of the difficulty for the mural in holding
them, still it received them. It thus became renowned as a blessed image. He exerted himself
primarily in thematic and non-thematic practice, and to his devoted disciples he granted
the empowerments, instructions and authorizations for Khecarī, the Great Compassionate
One according to the Tsembu tradition, Mahākāla and so on.

In short, he was free from the constraints of the eight worldly dharmas and lived as a great
renunciant and lord among yogis until, at the age of seventy-two, he passed into the realm
of peace. I was the one to offer him the prompting instructions for the post-death state
and to perform his cremation ceremony.[12]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.