The Lineage Prayer for the Natural Liberation of Grasping (Dzinpa Rangdrol)
by Do Khyentsé Yeshé Dorjé1

kunzang yabyum tönpa ö mingyur
Samantabhadra and Samantabhadrā in union, Teacher of Immutable Light,2
traktung shyönnu pawo tobden pal
Glorious and powerful, blood-drinking Youthful Hero,3
drimé sangdak garab tsokyé jé
Stainless Lord of Secrets [Vajrapāṇi], Garab Dorjé, the Lake-Born Lord,
dechen mendara la solwa deb
And Great Bliss Mandāravā—to you I pray.

jordrol tulshyuk tarchin rakshi ta
Rakṣita, who perfected the yogic observances of union and liberation,
drub gyé chimé pa chik dampa jé
Lord Dampa, who is the sole forefather of a hundred adepts,
daki jemo yingchuk lab kyi drön
Labdrön, who is the lady of the ḍākinīs and the queen of space—
shyi chö gyüpar ché la solwa deb
Lineages of Pacification and Severance, to you I pray.

orgyen pé jung bi mé gyutrul gar
Dancing illusory display of Padmasambhava of Oḍḍiyāna and Vimalamitra,
zabsang tenpa shyir shyeng long dzé jé
Lord who brought forth the foundational profound and secret teachings,
daki sangdzö chenpor wang gyurwé
Master of the magnificent secret treasury of the ḍākinīs—
terchen jalü dorjér solwa deb
The great treasure-revealer, Jalü Dorjé, to you I pray.

khachö deden shying na varahi
Vajravārāhī in the blissful realm of Khecara
ngayab ling du metok mendara
And Mandāravā Flower in Cāmaradvīpa,
lar yang ten drö döndu mi dzur jön
You came once again in the guise of a human for the benefit of the teachings and beings;
yidam drub nyé ngödrub nam nyi tob
Discovering the attainments of the deities, you gained the two accomplishments—
yumchen daki chok la solwa deb
Great Mother and supreme ḍākinī [Losel Drölma],4 to you I pray.

nangsi wanggyur drub gyé shyal kyin chok
Supreme successor of a hundred adepts with mastery over all appearing existence;
yeshe dorjé sang sum jin gyü dzö
Yeshé Dorjé’s three secrets, blessings, lineage, and treasuries—
yong la wanggyur ku sung tuk kyi sé
Master of them all, a son of enlightened body, speech, and mind,
dechen rigpé raldrir solwa deb
Dechen Rigpai Reltri,5—to you I pray.

löjé dir nang chö kün gyumé ngang
In the state where all apparent, mind-made phenomena of this life are illusory,
milam tsul zik ré dang dokpadral
You recognized their dream-like nature and were free from hope and doubt,
nga khyö chokri kündral drowé gön
Beyond all biased distinctions between self and other—protector of beings,
kyab chok dechen özer la solwa deb
Supreme refuge, Dechen Özer,6 to you I pray.

drimé khyenpé lha lam yangpa né
Through the vast, heavenly path of stainless knowledge,
tsewé nyingjé ötong barwé zi
You blaze brilliantly with the intense light of love and compassion,
dro nam münpé makrum sel dzepa
And dispel the dense darkness of transmigrating beings
tubten chö kyi dorjér solwa deb
Tubten Chökyi Dorjé7—to you I pray.

pang tok gyalwa nam dang ro chik kyang
Although you are experientially the same as the victorious ones in renunciation and realization,
tukjé jedzin sangye ngö lé lhak
In your compassionate care for disciples, you are actually superior to the buddhas—
kadrin tsungmé tenpé drönmé chok
Incomparably gracious and supreme lamp of the teachings,
palgön lama chok la solwa deb
Glorious protector, supreme guru, to you I pray.

lab chen tukkyé zab yang gyatso lé
Great [blessing] waves from the extensive ocean of the profound awakening mind,
mindrol dampé chuwo nampa shyi
The four rivers of instructions concerning maturation and liberation
kalzang duljé shying künkhyab dzepé
Pervade all the realms containing disciples endowed with good fortune—
ngö gyü lamé tsok la sol solwa deb
Assemblies of lineage gurus, to you I pray.

sangye kündü lama chö kyi ku
Embodiment of all buddhas, dharmakāya guru,
ma chik yumchen yermé kadrinchen
Inseparable from the single, gracious Great Mother,
nying né dungshuk drakpö solwa deb
I fervently pray to you from the depths of my heart!
trulnang nyem jé dü shyi lé gyal shying
Bless me with victory over the four māras, creators of delusional perception and pride!
kyemé chöku tokpar jin gyi lob
Bless me to realize the unborn dharmakāya!

Light issues from my heart, invoking in the space before me the oceanic sources of refuge from
the ten directions and three times in the aspect of the maṇḍala of the five deities of
the demon-subduing Fierce Mother8—Vajra Samaya Jaḥ. Finally, with Jaḥ Hūṃ Baṃ Hoḥ, the field
of merit dissolves into me.

| Translated by Ryan Jacobson, Tom Greensmith and Tenzin Choephel, 2021.

Source: Ye shes rdo rje. 1978. “'Dzin pa rang grol brgyud pa'i gsol 'debs bzhugs.” In Gcod 'dzin
pa rang grol gyi 'don cha'i skor. Edited by Rgyal dbang nyi ma. TBRC W26033. 1 vols.
Paro: Ngodrub and Sherab Demy, pp. 43–45.
↑ Edited by Gyalwang Nyima↑ Immutable Light (’od mi ’gyur) is an epithet for Samantabhadra.
↑ Powerful Warrior Youth or Youthful Hero (gzhon nu dpa’ bo stobs ldan) is the sixth of the
twelve foundational teachers (ston pa bcu gnyis) of Dzogchen in this world-system.↑ Losel
Drölma (1802–1861) was Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje’s half-sister and spiritual consort, as well
as a custodian of his teachings and a respected Dzogchen teacher in her own right.↑ Dechen
Rigpai Reltri (1830–1896) was the second son of Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje. See: Ryan M
Jacobson and Tenzin Choephel, "Rigpai Reltri," Treasury of Lives, accessed March 11, 2021,
http://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Rigpai-Reltri/10617.↑ Dechen Özer Taye of Tsering
Jong, the residence of Jigme Lingpa (1730–1798), was a student and scribe for Do Khyentse
Yeshe Dorje.↑ The Fifth Dzogchen Drubwang, Tubten Chökyi Dorje (1872–1935). See: Ron
Garry, "The Fifth Dzogchen Drubwang, Tubten Chokyi Dorje," Treasury of Lives, accessed March
11, 2021, http://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Dzogchen-Drubwang-05-Tubten-Chokyi-Dorje/9646.↑
The Fierce Mother, or Tröma Nakmo (khros ma nag mo).